[MUSIC]
These days in web development world,
we often hear people
mentioning the terms responsive design and
mobile first approach.
Let's try and understand what
is meant by these terms, and
how they affect the way you design your
websites and your web applications.
Your obvious question is going to
be why consider responsive design?
To help us understand this, let's consider
how people access websites these days?
Traditionally, when websites were first
designed, you could pretty much assume
that people will be browsing
your websites from a computer.
These days your websites could be
visited from a smartphone, a tablet or
a computer with different screen sizes and
screen resolutions.
How do we render our websites consistently
on devices of different screen sizes?
The one size fits all
approach that traditional
website designers have
taken no longer fixed bill.
We need a better approach,
an approach that will automatically
adapt your website to the size of
the screen on which it is being viewed.
This is where we have to take an approach
to adapt to the user's view port.
This has to be built into your
website design and development so
that it will automatically adapt to
the viewport of the user's device.
To help you better appreciate the need for
addressing devices of
different screen sizes.
I am taking the help of the developer
options that might Safari browser
provides that enables me to view the
website with screens of different sizes.
So that hopefully will convince of you
of why we made responsive web design.
So here you see that
Coursera website being
rendered on a 1920 by 1080 screen sites.
This would be a typical large desktop or
a high resolution laptop screen.
Then let's consider the same website
being viewed using a smaller screen such.
So you see automatically your
screen layout is slightly
adjusting to the size of
the viewport of your device,
same thing at 800 by 600.
So let's go down in screen sizes, this
is an iPad close view of the same site.
This is an iPad Air 2 size,
this is an iPad Mini 4 size,
note the transition from an iPad Mini 4
size to an iPhone 6S
Plus in portrait mode.
You'll now notice that the Navigation Bot
has now collapsed into a button here,
which when you click will reveal
the options from your Navigation Bash.
And let's look at the same
thing in our iPhone 6S
in landscape mode,
note how the screen adopts itself.
Similarly for
an iPhone 6S in landscape mode and
go down to an iPhone SE,
and you see how the website
has change the way it is being rendered.
So hopefully, this example has
illustrated to you how and
why we need responsive web design.
The second related concept that
you will hear is mobile first.
The mobile first approach instead
looks at designing a website for
a mobile device first.
So consider how you would satisfy the
screen constraints of your mobile device.
And then as your screen size expands,
you would automatically
start an app to your website to
the larger and larger screen sizes.
Perhaps, you're willing more and
more of the content.
So as to take advantage of
the increasing screen real estate.
So the same website when seeing on
a mobile device might have only
parts of the information
being revealed to the user.
But then when rendered on
a full fledge desktop it
might show a lot more detail
version of the website.
Now this has to be automatically
adapted based upon the information
that you get from the device from
which your website is being viewed.
So how do we get this information?
Fortunately, doing responsive
web design is supported by
many of the modern front end web
UI frameworks including Bootstrap.
So when we look at Bootstrap's
definition on it's webpage it says,
responsive mobile first approach.
Yeah, how do we go by doing
responsive web design?
So there are several concepts that
are built in to your frame time
web UI frameworks that come to the aid
when you need to do responsive web design.
First and foremost is what
is called is a Grid system?
We're going to look at the Bootstrap's
Grid system in more detail in the next
lecture.
So that we'll understand exactly how
we can leverage that to be able to do
responsive web design.
The second aspect is fluid images, so
that your images that you include in your
website will automatically adapt
itself to the screen size.
And the third part is what is called
a CSS media queries from your CSS code.
You can query the size of the media and
then appropriately adjust your CSS classes
to fit the size of the device's screen.
Now how do media queries work?
Let's look at that next.
Media queries are supported
in CSS like this.
So the technology allows you to do a media
query to specify the minimum width
of the screen under which this particular
set of CSS classes will be active.
So this would be specified in
your CSS file as @media, and
then within bracket,
you specify for example, min-width.
There are a lot more options to the media
queries than what I'm showing here.
This is just one example of how you would
build a media query in your CSS code.
Taking a look at
Bootstrap's CSS code itself,
let's go in and see how media
queries are being used by Bootstrap.
So here you see an example of a media
query where it says, @media and
min-width 576 pixels.
And then it specifies that those
particular CSS class call container,
which we will learn more
about in the next lecture,
and also in the exercise that follows.
We will see that the container's width is
set based upon the width of the screen.
Similarly, for a higher width screen, the
container width is automatically adjusted.
So this is what enables
your web UI framework to
support responsive web design.
So doing media queries,
your web UI framework is able to
establish what kind of device
you're rendering your website on.
And correspondingly
adjust the CSS classes to
fit that particular devices screen size.
So then obviously, the next question that
is going to come in your mind is how do we
do this in practice?
Fortunately, if you start
with a well designed
front end web UI framework like Bootstrap,
things become very straightforward.
We will learn more about this in the next
lecture and the exercise that follows.
[MUSIC]